# InsuranceType_and_CancerDiagnosis
How type of insurance affect early stage cancer diagnosis in pre-Affordable Care Act (ACA) vs post-ACA
## Motivation
Everyone is susceptible to cancer and the way we have changed our lifestyle and environment chances are more that we are accumulating and passing on genetic mutations to the next generations. If I am not wrong, there is no chance of reducing the cancer unless our own body start developing a new mechanism against it, but that will be too optimistic. Therefore, not waiting for any miracle to happen, I believe in "KARMA", and advocate to educate ourselves from cancer prevention, finding new treatments & diagnostic tools, working at the levels of lifestyle, food, and our environment. However, people from lower socio-economic class are victim of the disparity in securing their interest in staying healthy and cancer-free. They do not have proper health insurance or totally rely on government sponsored insurance are more susceptible to cancer. Restricted access to primary care practioner and timely physicals & screening make their cancer undiagnosed and they get diagnosed only at late stages of cancer, which unfortunately affect their treatment options and result in poor clinical outcomes. My fight against cancer and this type of inequality mix well together and excited me to do this project.
## Executive Summary
Early diagnosis of cancer is the key for cancer survival. Stage at which cancer is diagnosed determine treatment options, disease progression, chances of getting metastasized, life-expectancy, survival rate and over all clinical outcomes.  Based on the diagnosis stage, we are able to predict five-year survival rate of the patients. For instance, five-year survival rate for diagnosis at early-stage lung cancer is around 56 percent, which means people diagnosed early will live for at least five years after diagnosis. However, the five-year survival rate for people diagnosed with late-stage lung cancer is only 5 percent. Since early stage diagnosis directly impacts on life-expectancy of the cancer patient I chose to study the social factor, which can affect early diagnosis of cancer. 

Studies showed that both biological and social determinant limit the early diagnosis of cancer. Still some types of cancers remain undiagnosed till late stage due to its complexity. Cancer statistics and public health studies have shown that socio-economic factors affect the life-expectancy and overall clinical outcome of the cancer patients. One of the most important factors from these socio-economic factors that impact life-expectancy of cancer patients is the health insurance status/type, which is the central theme of this project. Since stage at which cancer is diagnosed affect life-expectancy, this study is aimed to understand how insurance status or type of insurance could affect the chances of getting diagnosed at early stage of the cancer, which in turn directly affect life-expectancy. Therefore, I hypothesized that:
“Status and type of health insurance affect the stage of the cancer diagnosis and thereby life-expectancy”.
To answer these questions, we need information of stage of cancer diagnosis when first time it was diagnosed and insurance type/status of that individual. Fortunately, the National Cancer Database (NCDB) has data of 14 most commonly diagnosed solid tumors in the United States consisting more than 9 million cases from 2003–2016. The insurance status/type, age groups, and first cancer diagnosis stage is also available to download specifically required for this project. 

This project involves components of socio-economic framework and its impact on clinical outcomes of cancer patients, which I am very passionate about. Government policies such as Affordable Care Act (ACA) implementation decreased the uninsured share of the population to roughly half, with estimates ranging from 20 to 24 million additional people covered during 2016. It is therefore warranted to observe association of insurance status/type on cancer diagnosis stage in pre-ACA and post-ACA years data if we need to answer some additional questions that how insurance policy affected the cancer diagnosis and if it does then the improvement in which may be linked with decline in cancer mortality and increasing five-year survival 
## Data Question
The central hypothesis of this study is based on the strong correlation of socio-economic factor with life-expectancy of cancer patient. The same correlation we may observe in case of the insurance status with stage of cancer diagnosis, which in turn directly correlated with life-expectancy; therefore, I hypothesized that: “Status and type of health insurance affect the stage of the cancer diagnosis and thereby life-expectancy”; which will be addressed by the following questions: 
Q1: Does health insurance status or type of health insurance affect the early diagnosis of cancer?
Q2: How Pre-ACA and Post-ACA affected the early diagnosis of cancer? 

There are differences in life-expectancy across socio-economic groups for many cancer types. Since cancer is considered as pre-existing condition it is hard to manage cancer treatment. Insurance status/type is one of the most important factors affecting the diagnosed or yet to be diagnosed cancer patients. I found one study that found that uninsured or Medicaid patients had a higher risk of being diagnosed with advanced stage (III/IV) than privately insured patients for most cancer types (1). Another study was focused cancer diagnosis stage in nonelderly patients and insurance coverage before and after Affordable Care Act (2).
1.	Han X, Zhu S, Tian Y, Kohler BA, Jemal A, Ward E. Insurance Status and Cancer 
Stage at Diagnosis Prior to the Affordable Care Act in the United States. J
Registry Manag. 2016 Fall;41(3):143-151. PubMed PMID: 28121315.
2.	Ahmedin Jemal, Chun Chieh Lin, Amy J. Davidoff, and Xuesong Han. Changes in Insurance Coverage and Stage at Diagnosis Among Nonelderly Patients With Cancer After the Affordable Care Act. Journal of Clinical Oncology 2017 35:35, 3906-3915 
 
## Data Sources
The National Cancer Database (NCDB, http://oliver.facs.org/BMPub/) maintains data of 14 most commonly diagnosed solid tumors in the United States consisting more than 9 million cases from 2003–2016 (for some parameters up to 2016). Data were collected from three types of hospitals (community, comprehensive community, and academic/teaching facilities) from specific geographic region or state.
